:tocdepth: 3

******************
10.0 Release Notes
******************

.. contents::

Release Notes Information
=========================

This document includes information on CUBRID 10.0(Build No. 10.0.x.xxxx). 
CUBRID 10.0 includes all of the fixed errors and improved features that were detected in the CUBRID 9.2 and were applied to the previous versions.

For details on CUBRID 9.2 or lower, see http://www.cubrid.org/manual/92/en/release_note/index.html.

For details on CUBRID 2008 R4.3 or less, see http://release.cubrid.org/en.

Overview
========

CUBRID 10.0 is the version which stabilized and improved CUBRID 9.2.

CUBRID 10.0's DB volume is not compatible with CUBRID 9.2. Therefore, if you use CUBRID 9.2 or less, you must **migrate the database**. Regarding this, see :doc:`/upgrade`.

Administrative Convenience Improvement
--------------------------------------


Additions in SQL functions and statements
-----------------------------------------


Performance Improvement
-----------------------


Stabilization in HA replication
-------------------------------



Improvements and Stabilization in Sharding Features
---------------------------------------------------


Globalization
-------------

    
Behavior Changes
----------------


Configuration
-------------


Installation
------------


Driver Compatibility
--------------------

*   The JDBC and CCI driver of CUBRID 10.0 are compatible with the DB server of CUBRID 9.1, 9.2, 2008 R4.1, R4.3 or R4.4.

Not only the above issues, but also many issues for stability are fixed. For more details on changes, see the following. Users of previous versions should check the :ref:`changed-behaviors100` and :ref:`new-cautions100` sections.

New Features
============

Administrative Convenience
--------------------------

SQL
---

CREATE PROCECURE/FUNCTION 문에서 "OR REPLACE" 구문을 사용할 수 있게 수정(CUBRIDSUS-6542)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: sql

    CREATE FUNCTION func_or_replace(I IN NUMBER) RETURN NUMBER 
    AS LANGUAGE JAVA NAME 'sptest.testint(INT) RETURN INT';

    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION func_or_replace(I IN NUMBER) RETURN NUMBER 
    AS LANGUAGE JAVA NAME 'sptest.testint(INT) RETURN INT';

    CREATE PROCEDURE proc_or_replace(I IN NUMBER) 
    AS LANGUAGE JAVA NAME 'sptest.testint2(INT)';

    CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE proc_or_replace(I IN NUMBER) 
    AS LANGUAGE JAVA NAME 'sptest.testint2(INT)';
    
테이블 표현식을 감싸는 괄호를 허용하도록 수정(CUBRIDSUS-6380)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

아래 예와 같이 "(SELECT * FROM tab1) AS tab11"와 같은 테이블 표현식을 괄호로 감싸도 테이블 표현식으로 인식되도록 수정했다. 

.. code-block:: sql 

    SELECT * FROM ((SELECT * FROM tab1) AS tab11), tab0; 

수정 이전 버전에서 위의 질의를 수행하면 아래의 오류를 반환한다. 
     
:: 

    ERROR: syntax error, unexpected AS, expecting ')' 

"UPDATE tbl SET a=1, b=a" 수행 시 b의 값이 1이 될 수 있도록 수정(CUBRIDSUS-8202)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


update_use_attribute_references 시스템 파라미터를 추가하고, 이 값이 yes이면 UPDATE 문에서 명시한 칼럼 값이 해당 칼럼을 사용하는 다른 칼럼의 갱신에 영향을 주도록 수정했다. 
이 파라미터 값이 no(기본값)이면 수정 이전처럼 동작한다. 

.. code-block:: sql 

    CREATE TABLE tbl(a int, b int); 
    INSERT INTO tbl values (null, 10); 

    UPDATE tbl SET a=1, b=a; 
    SELECT * FROM tbl; 
    -- 수정 이전 버전에서는 1, 10을 반환한다. 
    -- 수정 이후 버전에서는 update_use_attribute_references 시스템 파라미터의 값이 no이면 수정 이전 버전과 같은 값을, yes이면 1,1을 반환한다. 


"CASCADE CONSTRAINTS" 절을 DROP 테이블 문장에 추가하여, 외래 키가 참조하는 기본 키를 가진 테이블의 DROP이 가능하도록 수정(CUBRIDSUS-9830)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: sql 

    CREATE TABLE a_parent ( 
        id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY, 
        name VARCHAR(10) 
    ); 
    CREATE TABLE b_child ( 
        id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY, 
        parent_id INTEGER, 
        CONSTRAINT fk_parent_id FOREIGN KEY(parent_id) REFERENCES a_parent(id) ON DELETE CASCADE ON UPDATE RESTRICT 
    ); 

    DROP TABLE a_parent CASCADE CONSTRAINTS; 
     
위의 질의를 수행하면 a_parent 테이블이 DROP되며, b_child 테이블의 외래 키 역시 DROP된다. 단, b_child 테이블의 데이터는 유지된다. 

통계 정보 갱신 시 샘플링 방식 도입(CUBRIDSUS-11962)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  
통계 정보 갱신 시 샘플링 방식을 도입하여 통계 정보 갱신 시간이 단축되었다. 

수정 이후, "UPDATE STATISTICS" 문 뒤에 "WITH FULLSCAN" 구문이 없으면 샘플링된 데이터를 가지고 통계 정보를 업데이트하며, "WITH FULLSCAN"을 추가하면 전체 데이터를 가지고 통계 정보를 업데이트한다. 
  
.. code-block:: sql 
  
    UPDATE STATISTICS ON foo; 
    UPDATE STATISTICS ON foo WITH FULLSCAN; 

"CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS" 구문 지원(CUBRIDSUS-12366)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: sql

    CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS tbl1;

드라이버
--------
   
운영 편의성
-----------


HA
--


Sharding
--------


다국어
------

유틸리티
--------


설정
----



.. _changed-behaviors100:

동작 변경
=========

SQL
---


다국어
------


HA
--



드라이버
--------


.. _changed-config100:

설정
----


기타
----



개선 및 오류 수정 
=================

성능 및 최적화
--------------



안정성
------


SQL
---


다국어
------


분할
----


HA
--

Sharding
--------





드라이버
--------




운영 편의성
-----------


유틸리티
--------

설정, 빌드 및 설치
------------------


    
기타
----


Cautions
=========

.. _new-cautions100:

New Cautions
------------

DB volume of 9.2 version and 9.1 version is not compatible(CUBRIDSUS-11316)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As the DB volume of 9.2 version and 9.1 version are not compatible, a user upgrading CUBRID 9.1 to version 9.2 should convert the existing DB volume to the DB volume of version 9.2 after installing CUBRID 9.2. For volume migration, the migrate_90_to_91 utility for version 9.2 is provided. ::

    % migrate_91_to_92 <db_name>

For details, see :doc:`/upgrade`.

.. note:: 9.1 version users should upgrade all drivers, broker, and DB server together as migrating DB volume.

DB volume of 9.2 version and the lower versions of 9.1 version are not compatible
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As the DB volume of version 9.2 and versions lower than 9.1 are not compatible, the user should migrate the data using cubrid unloaddb/loaddb. For more details, see :doc:`/upgrade`\.

Existing Cautions
-----------------

Locale(language and charset) is specified when creating DB
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is changed as locale is specified when creating DB.
   
CUBRID_CHAERSET environment variable is removed
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As locale(language and charset) is specified when creating DB from 9.2 version, CUBRID_CHARSET is not used anymore.

.. 4.4new

[JDBC] Change zero date of TIMESTAMP into '1970-01-01 00:00:00'(GST) from '0001-01-01 00:00:00' when the value of zeroDateTimeBehavior in the connection URL is "round"(CUBRIDSUS-11612)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
 
From 2008 R4.4, when the value of the property "zeroDateTimeBehavior" in the connection URL is "round", the  zero date value of TIMESTAMP is changed into '1970-01-01 00:00:00'(GST) from '0001-01-01 00:00:00'. You should be cautious when using zero date in your application.


Recommendation for installing CUBRID SH package in AIX(CUBRIDSUS-12251)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you install CUBRID SH package by using ksh in AIX OS, it fails with the following error. 
  
:: 
  
    0403-065 An incomplete or invalid multibyte character encountered. 
  
Therefore, it is recommended to use ksh93 or bash instead of ksh.
  
:: 
  
    $ ksh93 ./CUBRID-9.2.0.0146-AIX-ppc64.sh 
    $ bash ./CUBRID-9.2.0.0146-AIX-ppc64.sh 

CUBRID_LANG is removed, CUBRID_MSG_LANG is added
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

From version 9.1, CUBRID_LANG environment variable is no longer used.
To output the utility message and the error message, the CUBRID_MSG_LANG environment variable is used. 


Modify how to process an error for the array of the result of executing several queries at once in the CCI application(CUBRIDSUS-9364)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When executing several queries at once in the CCI application, if an error has occurs from at least one query among the results of executing queries by using the cci_execute_array function, the cci_execute_batch function, the error code of the corresponding query was returned from 2008 R3.0 to 2008 R4.1. This problem has been fixed to return the number of the entire queries and check the error of each query by using the CCI_QUERY_RESULT_* macros from 2008 R4.3 and 9.1.

In earlier versions of this modification, there is no way to know whether each query in the array is success or failure when an error occurs; therefore, it it requires certain conditions.

.. code-block:: c

    ...
    char *query = "INSERT INTO test_data (id, ndata, cdata, sdata, ldata) VALUES (?, ?, 'A', 'ABCD', 1234)";
    ...
    req = cci_prepare (con, query, 0, &cci_error);
    ...
    error = cci_bind_param_array_size (req, 3);
    ...
    error = cci_bind_param_array (req, 1, CCI_A_TYPE_INT, co_ex, null_ind, CCI_U_TYPE_INT);
    ...
    n_executed = cci_execute_array (req, &result, &cci_error);

    if (n_executed < 0)
      {
        printf ("execute error: %d, %s\n", cci_error.err_code, cci_error.err_msg);

        for (i = 1; i <= 3; i++)
          {
            printf ("query %d\n", i);
            printf ("result count = %d\n", CCI_QUERY_RESULT_RESULT (result, i));
            printf ("error message = %s\n", CCI_QUERY_RESULT_ERR_MSG (result, i));
            printf ("statement type = %d\n", CCI_QUERY_RESULT_STMT_TYPE (result, i));
          }
      }
    ...

From the modified version, entire queries are regarded as failure if an error occurs. In case that no error occurred, it is determined whether each query in the array succeeds or not.

.. code-block:: c

    ...
    char *query = "INSERT INTO test_data (id, ndata, cdata, sdata, ldata) VALUES (?, ?, 'A', 'ABCD', 1234)";
    ...
    req = cci_prepare (con, query, 0, &cci_error);
    ...
    error = cci_bind_param_array_size (req, 3);
    ...
    error = cci_bind_param_array (req, 1, CCI_A_TYPE_INT, co_ex, null_ind, CCI_U_TYPE_INT);
    ...
    n_executed = cci_execute_array (req, &result, &cci_error);
    if (n_executed < 0)
      {
        printf ("execute error: %d, %s\n", cci_error.err_code, cci_error.err_msg);
      }
    else
      {
        for (i = 1; i <= 3; i++)
          {
            printf ("query %d\n", i);
            printf ("result count = %d\n", CCI_QUERY_RESULT_RESULT (result, i));
            printf ("error message = %s\n", CCI_QUERY_RESULT_ERR_MSG (result, i));
            printf ("statement type = %d\n", CCI_QUERY_RESULT_STMT_TYPE (result, i));
          }
      }
    ...

In java.sql.XAConnection interface, HOLD_CURSORS_OVER_COMMIT is not supported(CUBRIDSUS-10800)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Current CUBRID does not support ResultSet.HOLD_CURSORS_OVER_COMMIT in java.sql.XAConnection interface.

From 9.0, STRCMP behaves case-sensitively
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Until the previous version of 9.0, STRCMP did not distinguish an uppercase and a lowercase. From 9.0, it compares the strings case-sensitively.
To make STRCMP case-insensitive, you should use case-insensitive collation(e.g.: utf8_en_ci).

.. code-block:: sql

    -- In previous version of 9.0 STRCMP works case-insensitively
    SELECT STRCMP ('ABC','abc');
    0
    
    -- From 9.0 version, STRCMP distinguish the uppercase and the lowercase when the collation is case-sensitive.
    export CUBRID_CHARSET=en_US.iso88591
    
    SELECT STRCMP ('ABC','abc');
    -1
    
    -- If the collation is case-insensitive, it distinguish the uppercase and the lowercase.
    export CUBRID_CHARSET=en_US.iso88591

    SELECT STRCMP ('ABC' COLLATE utf8_en_ci ,'abc' COLLATE utf8_en_ci);
    0

Since the 2008 R4.1 version, the Default value of CCI_DEFAULT_AUTOCOMMIT has been ON(CUBRIDSUS-5879)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The default value for the CCI_DEFAULT_AUTOCOMMIT broker parameter, which affects the auto commit mode for applications developed with CCI interface, has been changed to ON since CUBRID 2008 R4.1. As a result of this change, CCI and CCI-based interface (PHP, ODBC, OLE DB etc.) users should check whether or not the application's auto commit mode is suitable for this.

From the 2008 R4.0 version, the options and parameters that use the unit of pages were changed to use the unit of volume size(CUBRIDSUS-5136)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The options (-p, -l, -s), which use page units to specify the database volume size and log volume size of the cubrid createdb utility, will be removed. Instead, the new options, added after 2008 R4.0 Beta (--db-volume-size, --log-volume-size, --db-page-size, --log-page-size), are used.

To specify the database volume size of the cubrid addvoldb utility, use the newly-added option (--db-volume-size) after 2008 R4.0 Beta instead of using the page unit.
It is recommended to use the new system parameters in bytes because the page-unit system parameters will be removed. For details on the related system parameters, see the below.

Be cautious when setting db volume size if you are a user of a version before 2008 R4.0 Beta(CUBRIDSUS-4222)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

From the 2008 R4.0 Beta version, the default value of data page size and log page size in creating the database was changed from 4 KB to 16 KB. If you specify the database volume to the page count, the byte size of the volume may differ from your expectations. If you did not set any options, 100MB-database volume with 4KB-page size was created in the previous version. However, starting from the 2008 R4.0, 512MB-database volume with 16KB-page size is created.

In addition, the minimum size of the available database volume is limited to 20 MB. Therefore, a database volume less than this size cannot be created.

The change of the default value of some system parameters of the versions before 2008 R4.0(CUBRIDSUS-4095)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Starting from 2008 R4.0, the default values of some system parameters have been changed.

Now, the default value of max_clients, which specifies the number of concurrent connections allowed by a DB server, and the default value of index_unfill_factor that specifies the ratio of reserved space for future updates while creating an index page, have been changed. Furthermore, the default values of the system parameters in bytes now use more memory when they exceed the default values of the previous system parameters per page.

+-----------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+ 
| Previous System             | Added System               | Previous Default     | Changed Default    | 
| Parameter                   | Parameter                  | Value                | Value (unit: byte) |
|                             |                            |                      |                    | 
+=============================+============================+======================+====================+ 
| max_clients                 | None                       | 50                   | 100                | 
+-----------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+ 
| index_unfill_factor         | None                       | 0.2                  | 0.05               | 
+-----------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| data_buffer_pages           | data_buffer_size           | 100M(page size=4K)   | 512M               | 
+-----------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| log_buffer_pages            | log_buffer_size            | 200K(page size=4K)   | 4M                 | 
|                             |                            |                      |                    |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| sort_buffer_pages           | sort_buffer_size           | 64K(page size=4K)    | 2M                 | 
|                             |                            |                      |                    | 
+-----------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| index_scan_oid_buffer_pages | index_scan_oid_buffer_size | 16K(page size=4K)    | 64K                | 
|                             |                            |                      |                    | 
+-----------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+

In addition, when a database is created using cubrid createdb, the minimum value of the data page size and the log page size has been changed from 1K to 4K.
 
Changed so that database services, utilities, and applications cannot be executed when the system parameter is incorrectly configured(CUBRIDSUS-5375)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It has been changed so that now the related database services, utilities, and applications are not executed when configuring system parameters that are not defined in cubrid.conf or cubrid_ha.conf, when the value of system parameters exceed the threshold, or when the system parameters per page and the system parameters in bytes are used simultaneously.

Database fails to start if the data_buffer_size is configured with a value that exceeds 2G in CUBRID 32-bit version(CUBRIDSUS-5349)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the CUBRID 32-bit version, if the value of data_buffer_size exceeds 2G, the running database fails. Note that the configuration value cannot exceed 2G in the 32-bit version because of the OS limit.

Recommendations for controlling services with the CUBRID Utility in Windows Vista and higher(CUBRIDSUS-4186)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To control services using cubrid utility from Windows Vista and higher, it is recommended to start the command prompt window with administrative privileges.

If you don't start the command prompt window with administrative privileges and use the cubrid utility, you can still execute it with administrative privileges through the User Account Control (UAC) dialog box, but you will not be able to verify the resulting messages.

The procedures for starting the command prompt window as an administrator in Windows Vista and higher are as follows:

* Right-click [Start > All Programs > Accessories > Command Prompt].
* When [Execute as an administrator (A)] is selected, a dialog box to verify the privilege escalation is activated. Click “YES" to start with administrative privileges.
    
A manager server process-related error occurs in the execution of the CUBRID source after its build(CUBRIDSUS-3553)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
    
If users want to build the CUBRID source and install it themselves, they must build and install CUBRID and the CUBRID Manager respectively. If you check out only CUBRID source and run cubrid service start or cubrid manager start after build, the error "cubrid manager server is not installed" will occur.


GLO class which is used in 2008 r3.0 or before is not supported any longer(CUBRIDSUS-3826)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

CUBRID 2008 R3.0 and earlier versions processed Large Objects with the Generalized Large Object glo class, but the glo class has been removed from CUBRID 2008 R3.1 and later versions. Instead, they support BLOB and CLOB (LOB from this point forward) data types. (See :ref:`blob-clob` for more information about LOB data types).

glo class users are recommended to carry out tasks as follows:

* After saving GLO data as a file, modify to not use GLO in any application and DB schema.
* Implement DB migration by using the unloaddb and loaddb utilities.
* Perform tasks to load files into LOB data according to the modified application.
* Verify the application that you modified operates normally.

For reference, if the cubrid loaddb utility loads a table that inherits the GLO class or has the GLO class type, it stops the data from loading by displaying an error message, "Error occurred during schema loading."

With the discontinued support of GLO class, the deleted functions for each interface are as follows:

+------------+----------------------------+
| Interface  | Deleted Functions          |
+============+============================+
| CCI        | cci_glo_append_data        |
|            |                            |
|            | cci_glo_compress_data      |
|            |                            |
|            | cci_glo_data_size          |
|            |                            |
|            | cci_glo_delete_data        |
|            |                            |
|            | cci_glo_destroy_data       |
|            |                            |
|            | cci_glo_insert_data        |
|            |                            |
|            | cci_glo_load               |
|            |                            |
|            | cci_glo_new                |
|            |                            |
|            | cci_glo_read_data          |
|            |                            |
|            | cci_glo_save               |
|            |                            |
|            | cci_glo_truncate_data      |
|            |                            |
|            | cci_glo_write_data         |
|            |                            |
+------------+----------------------------+
| JDBC       | CUBRIDConnection.getNewGLO |
|            |                            |
|            | CUBRIDOID.loadGLO          |
|            |                            |
|            | CUBRIDOID.saveGLO          |
|            |                            |
+------------+----------------------------+
| PHP        | cubrid_new_glo             |
|            |                            |
|            | cubrid_save_to_glo         |
|            |                            |
|            | cubrid_load_from_glo       |
|            |                            |
|            | cubrid_send_glo            |
|            |                            |
+------------+----------------------------+

Port configuration is required if the protocol between the master and server processes is changed, or if two versions are running at the same time(CUBRIDSUS-3564)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Because the communication protocol between a master process (cub_master) and a server process (cub_server) has been changed, the master process of CUBRID 2008 R3.0 or later cannot communicate with the server process of a lower version, and the master process of a lower version cannot communicate with a server process of 2008 R3.0 version or later. Therefore, if you run two versions of CUBRID at the same time by adding a new version in an environment where a lower version has already been installed, you should modify the cubrid_port_id system parameter of cubrid.conf so that different ports are used by the different versions.

Specifying a question mark when entering connection information as a URL string in JDBC(CUBRIDSUS-3217)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When entering connection information as a URL string in JDBC, property information was applied even if you did not enter a question mark (?) in the earlier version. However, you must specify a question mark depending on syntax in this CUBRID 2008 R3.0 version. If not, an error is displayed. In addition, you must specify colon (:) even if there is no username or password in the connection information. ::

    URL=jdbc:CUBRID:127.0.0.1:31000:db1:::altHosts=127.0.0.2:31000,127.0.0.3:31000 -- Error
    URL=jdbc:CUBRID:127.0.0.1:31000:db1:::?altHosts=127.0.0.2:31000,127.0.0.3:31000 -- Normal

Not allowed to include @ in a database name(CUBRIDSUS-2828)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If @ is included in a database name, it can be interpreted that a host name has been specified. To prevent this, a revision has been made so that @ cannot be included in a database name when running cubrid createdb, cubrid renamedb and cubrid copydb utilities.
